---
id: "8"
path: "/blogs/iwomm-pt2-configuration-files"
title: "It Works On My Machine Part 2: Configuration files"
description: "Managing configs, dotenv files and secrets"
date: "11-06-2020"
tags: "node.js, javascript, react, iwomm"
---

Yaaays part 2 is finally here. In the [first part](/blogs/iwomm-pt1-env-variables) of these blog series we talked about how **environment variables** are very useful for our apps. Now it is important to know how to manage them along with other configuration related info. There are many ways of doing that but my preferred approach is to split them into **dotenv** (.env) and **config** files.

## Dotenv files

Dotenv what? Yes this secret little file that usually contains all the `environment related information`. It is something that devops engineers **love**! For your own sake you should start loving it as well otherwise they will replace everything with `yaml` files.

Dotenv files are something that should `not be stored on Github` or any other version control system as they normally contain `sensitive information`. A common practice is to include a `.env.copy` file which has all the default `environment values`. To get started we need to instruct users to make a copy of that file and rename it to `.env`. It is important that the application's readme file contains instructions for that to avoid confusion when onboarding new devs. They can then crack on setting up their environment without issues. Why not store the `.env` file itself on Github? It is because that may introduce complexity when deploying code as these files are going to be replaced by deployment scripts.

As mentioned already, dotenv files are supposed to contain environment / ops related information. In most cases that also means information that should be kept `secret`. So using dotenv files also promotes better security as following this practice prevents us from storing sensitive information on Github. That way each different environment is going to have a separate dotenv file which will only be known to the script that is responsible for deployments. I really hope that these scripts are not stored in a public repo 😆

In case I have not made it very clear so far let me say that again. Devops engineers **LOVE** dotenv files. If you ever reach a point of uncertainty and wonder if a key value pair should or not be a part of a dotenv file, then I have a trick that will give you an instant answer to that question. Just ask yourself the following. If someone from devops sees that variable will he/she respond with "_what am I supposed to do with that???_" If the answer is yes then that key value pair does not belong there, it belongs to the config files. Now time to talk about config files. (smooth transition)

## Config files

Config files are designed to have `application related information`. I bet that if you open **ANY** **React** or **Node.js** project, there will be at least a couple of config files on the root directory. Stuff like **jest.config.js**, **.babelrc**, **tsconfig.json** or even **package.json** just to name a few common ones. All of them store information that is directly related to our application.

Usually such information is `visible and open` to the public. It does not really matter to hide config files as they are `static`, meaning they do not change that often. It is also not very likely for them to change in different environments. If a config value has to change due to deploying to another environment, that means that it belongs to be inside the dotenv file.

It is common to see `engineers sharing their config files` on Twitter isn't it? It has become a "who's the coolest kid on the block" kind of thing to have to do so. This is because knowing that kind of information can not really cause any harm. However, sharing the credentials to your Production DB Master replication table can cause chaos so please don't. For really sensitive information it is recommended to use secrets.

## Application Secrets

Application secret keys or commonly referred as secrets are quite common in modern web apps. Especially in apps with tons of configuration. Using secrets is a very good practice for storing keys securely. **[AWS secrets manager](https://aws.amazon.com/secrets-manager/)** is one of the most popular solutions out there.

AWS secrets are attached to security policies which makes them `ultra secure`. Even if malicious actors somehow find a secret of the app somewhere, they cannot really do much with it. They need access rights to that specific AWS organisation and also to the corresponding IAM policy in order to access the key itself.

We can give to secrets whatever name we want. If that is used in combination with environment variables, they can solve another big issue many devs have which is `managing multiple environment keys`.

In the previous part of these blog series we talked about environment variables. One such variable I mentioned which is core to multi environment systems, was `ENV` or `STAGE`. That variable has the environment name so if we plan ahead we can create the following strategy for managing keys.

```bash
...
"database": `${ENV}/urls/database`,
"api_key": `${ENV}/keys/api`,
...
```

You see where I am going with this? If the environment is `develop` then we are going to end up with database key `develop/urls/database`. Similarly if the environment is `qa` then it will be `qa/urls/database` and the list goes on. This can be applied to anything! I have worked in systems where each time we open a PR there is feature environment setup for us. That environment has its own database, api endpoints and other unique to that environment stuff. Imagine how much of a nightmare it is to list all this configuration per environment.

That practice allows us to manage keys in a very simple way without having to go through logs or deployment scripts in order to find that values we are looking for. This approach works great with `Lambdas` and other AWS services. However the direction technology is moving towards will make this approach a lot more common without having to rely to Amazon for such awesome tools.

Managing configuration files can easily become a really unpleasant and painful task that no one wants to do, but things do not have to be so complicated. I got very confused when I first interacted with this crazy world of deployments. I hope that I helped you understand these principles. In the next part of these series I am going to talk about Docker.
